Australia, being part of the British Empire, fought
on the side of the Triple Entente (Britain, France
and Russia) and received its orders from the
British High Command. Early in January 1915,
Russia made a request to Britain for help.
The British High Command devised a plan
that would help Russia to take control on the
Eastern Front and lead to the capture of the
Turkish capital of Constantinople (known today
as Istanbul). The plan involved British, French,
Indian, Australian and New Zealand forces. The
last two countries would become linked together
as the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps
(Anzac). Their landing on the Gallipoli Peninsula
on 25 April 1915 became a signiﬁcant event in
their histories.
The original aim of the Gallipoli campaign
involved gaining control of the strait known as
the Dardanelles (source 7.27) by British navy
bombardment of Turkish forts on the Gallipoli
Peninsula. This was important because:
Russia’s only all-weather ports in the Black
Sea were entered from the Sea of Marmara, via
the Dardanelles. While Turkey controlled the
Dardanelles, Russia had limited movement
of shipping. This meant supplies of Russian
grain and oil could not be shipped to Great
Britain and France, and Russia could not
receive supplies of ammunition from its allies.
Without control of the Dardanelles, the
Entente powers could not move troops quickly
to and from the Eastern Front.
Control of the Dardanelles and the capture
of Constantinople would break the deadlock
on the Eastern Front, meaning Entente troops
could then concentrate on defeating Germany
on the Western Front.
Britain and France felt it was necessary to help
Russia to repay it for supporting the Triple
Entente in August 1914. They could not afford
to see Russia collapse or lose it as an ally.
In 1906, the British General Staff had
considered a similar idea but decided it was
too risky. Nine years later, the First Lord of the
Admiralty, Winston Churchill, disregarded
this risk and convinced members of the British
government and General Staff to accept the plan
to undertake a mainly naval attack on Turkish
forts on the Gallipoli Peninsula. This acceptance
occurred on 28 January 1915.
In March, Lord Kitchener, after consulting
Sir Ian Hamilton, modiﬁed the plan to include the
landing of a large army. Thus, according to CEW
Bean, the ofﬁcial war historian, ‘the tragedy of
Gallipoli was born’. 1 The noted Australian historian
Manning Clark stated ‘It was a plan for romantics,
a plan for those who believed a rich prize
outweighed the suffering, cruelty, and losses’
On 1 April 1915, troops of the Australian Imperial
Forces (AIF) who were based and training in
Egypt had their leave cancelled. Two days later
they were moved to the supposedly secret location
of Lemnos. The campaign’s aim was to land British
and French soldiers at Cape Helles and have them
capture the Achi Baba range.
Australian and New Zealand soldiers were to
land near Gaba Tepe and then capture Hill 971 on
Sari Bair. The landing of the Anzacs was timed
to be just before dawn. It was expected these two
highpoints would be captured on the ﬁrst day.
At 4.30 am on 25 April 1915 the ﬁrst Anzacs
came ashore at Ari Burnu (later renamed Anzac
Cove), over 1 kilometre north of the intended
landing site. In the dark, British seamen had
miscalculated the current of the ocean and
position. The 16 000 men in this ﬁrst wave were
faced with steep cliffs and deadly ﬁre from Turkish
guns. At the end of the ﬁrst day they had advanced
between 500 and 900 metres inland at a cost of
2000 casualties.
Generals Birdwood and Bridges considered
evacuating immediately. But General Hamilton
refused and ordered the Anzacs to ‘dig yourselves
right in and stick it out’.
Charles Bean, usually referred to as CEW
Bean, was Australia’s ofﬁcial war correspondent
during World War I. He was present at the
landing on 25 April 1915 and accompanied the
AIF throughout the remainder of the war.
From 1921 to 1942, Bean was appointed editor
of the 12-volume Ofﬁcial History of Australia in
the War of 1914–1918. He wrote six of the volumes
and is credited with creating the ‘Anzac legend’
(see the section on the Anzac legend later in this
chapter). Bean was a strong supporter for the
establishment of the Australian War Memorial
in Canberra.